# Jupyter Security Bi-weekly Meeting

## March 7, 2023

| Name               | affiliation| username         |
| -------------------| -----------| -----------------|
| Jason Weill        | AWS        | @JasonWeill      |
| Joe Lucas          | NVIDIA     | @josephtlucas    |
| Rollin Thomas      | NERSC      | @rcthomas        |
| Jason Grout        | Databricks | @jasongrout      |
| Rick Wagner        | UCSD       | @rpwagner        |

* Jason W: Add Joe Lucas to Security Council (https://github.com/jupyter/security/pull/56) — also added to Google Group
* Rollin: TrustedCI Summit October 2023, opportunity for Jupyter security training and workshop
    * Met with the 2 leads from [TrustedCI](https://www.trustedci.org/about) (NSF Center of Excellence for Cybersecurity)
        * Supports major NSF facilities that deploy infrastructure for research
        * TrustedCI hosts an annual cybersecurity summit
        * E.g. a few years ago, Rick and Matthias gave a security training on Jupyter there
    * Discussion was some kind of Jupyter-focused workshop/activity at 2023 event (October)
        * Could be an opportunity to update the Jupyter security training tutorial (1/2 day)
            * Rick would update this, he also gave the same tutorial at the same conference before with Matthias
            * Rick will get started on this sooner rather than later
        * Then, a 1/2 day or full day Jupyter security workshop
            * Potential for overlap with some other cohosted workshops
            * E.g. [Zeek](https://zeek.org/) workshop: Monitoring and instrumenting Jupyter to work w/Zeek?
        * Questions:
            * Is the security council broadly in favor of pursuing a workshop? **Answer: Yes**
            * Participants (Berkeley location is "central")?
            * What gaps are there in funding for the logistics?
            * When is TrustedCI going to put up website, etc? => sooner helps people get approvals
            * Industry partners (Anaconda, AWS, NVIDIA, ...): 2 for 1?  Send a person and seed a scholarship?
* Jason G: Intigriti
    * Had meeting w/Charlotte De Vleeschouwer, Customer Success Manager, on Feb. 23
    * Discussed scope of the program
    * Scope was larger than Intigriti expected
    * Wanted to start with jupyter-server, JupyterLab, JupyterHub
        * Start small and iterate
        * Enlarge scope a little more if that works
    * Program created, three groups
        * One for each w/a contact
        * Each group can have multiple packages
    * Wants another call w/POCs for each to kick off
    * Jason to close the loop w/other projects that won't be included in first round and help set up this kickoff meeting
* Rick: What do we want people looking at?
    * Example: Recent git CLI vulnerabilities
        * Git is provided in Docker images
        * Should we have advised people to ensure Git was updated?
        * Not Jupyter-specific code, but part of the "packaging"
        * Should that figure into the vulnerability reporting process?
    * With respect to conda and PyPI what is the dependency chain?
        * What other repos are important?
        * Install instructions based on meta-packages or "top" packages that get installed?
        * Older packages and repos?  Maybe recommend dependabot is working for all these
        * What leverages GitHub automation to get a handle on all the packages?
        * Next policy recommendation would be something like:
            * Be running dependabot wherever we can
            * Here are the list of packages of greatest concern/interest
        * Node-based stuff?
            * Do the npm repos have 2FA, etc.
            * PyPI likewise
    * Security sprints?
    * Maybe start with dependency graphing
    * Example open source vuln management policies
        * https://github.com/ossf/oss-vulnerability-guide
        * https://about.gitlab.com/handbook/security/security-engineering/application-security/vulnerability-management.html
